Feature/hpa post (#34)
mmeendez8/mmeendez8.github.io: _posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide.md

---
layout: post
title: "A Guide to Horizontal Pod Autoscaler"
subtitle: "Understand and visualize how Kubernetes HPA works with a real world example"
description: "Discover how Kubernetes' Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) functions using a real use case. Learn to manage and observe HPA in action with practical examples. This post will show you how to optimize resource usage, streamline pod scaling, and enhance application performance using a simple visualization tool."
image: "/assets/images/fullsize/posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide/test.jpg"
selected: y
mathjax: y
---

> A few weeks ago, while reviewing service metrics in Grafana, I noticed unexpected behavior in one of our services—there were more pods than necessary given the current traffic load. This led me to uncover that the extra pods were spawned by the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) based on the metrics we had configured (a while ago). Understanding HPA took me a few hours. This is a task typically handled by specialized teams in larger companies, but working at a startup forces you to wear many hats and I often find myself analyzing how models perform in production. In this post, I'll discuss the issues I encountered with HPA and demonstrate how a simple visualization tool can help anticipate the number of replicas needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few weeks ago, while reviewing service metrics in Grafana, I noticed some unexpected behaviour in one of our services—there were more pods than necessary given the current traffic load. This led me to uncover that the extra pods were spawned by the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) based on the metrics we had configured (a while ago). Understanding HPA took me a few hours. This is a task typically handled by specialized teams in larger companies, but working at a startup forces you to wear many hats and I often find myself analyzing how models perform in production. In this post, I'll discuss the issues I encountered with HPA and demonstrate how a simple visualization tool can help anticipate the number of replicas needed.
```

## Visualization tool

> Before we explore how HPA works, I want to showcase the visualization tool. It simplifies understanding the HPA formula used to calculate the desired number of replicas:

Reviewer: I think you should:
1. Add a [reference](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#algorithm-details) to the documentation where this formula is cited.
2. Briefly explain below what each variable represents, something like
 * `currentReplicas`: The current number of replicas of the pod.
 * `currentMetricValue`: The current observed value of the metric being monitored (e.g., CPU utilization).
 * `desiredMetricValue`: The desired target value for the metric (e.g., the target CPU utilization).

Reviewer: I see you've explained these in the section below. In my opinion, this visualization section is not useful here. The formula comes out of the blue, and you're already presenting the tool right after the Explanation section. I'd just remove it

```

> desiredReplicas = ceil[currentReplicas * ( currentMetricValue / desiredMetricValue )]

Reviewer: Maybe best displayed with latex using \frac{}

```

> You can interact with this tool to see how changes in metrics affect the number of replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can interact with this tool to see how changes in the metrics affect the number of replicas.
```

> {% include hpa.html %}

Reviewer: In the formula you use `desiredMetric`, but in the snippet you use `Target Metric` instead. You should use the same everywhere to avoid confusion

## What is HPA?

The [Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/) in Kubernetes automatically adjusts the number of pod replicas in a deployment, replicaset, or statefulset based on observed CPU utilization or other select metrics. This feature is very useful for managing application scalability and resource efficiency, particularly in environments with variable workloads.

For example Statsbomb can use HPA to handle increased traffic during a weekend when there are more games being played. The HPA can automatically scale up the number of web server pods to maintain performance, and scale down during off-peak hours to reduce costs. This dynamic adjustment helps ensure that the application consistently meets performance targets without manual intervention.

In next sections I will briefly explain how HPA works and how to use this simple tool to ease your scaling decisions.

## How does HPA work?

> First of all we need to make sure we understand the concepts of `request` and `limits` since they are fundamental to how resources are allocated and managed across the pods in a cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all we need to make sure we understand the concepts of `requests` and `limits` since they are fundamental to how resources are allocated and managed across the pods in a cluster.
```

- **Requests**: This value specifies the amount of CPU or memory that Kubernetes guarantees to a pod. When a pod is scheduled, the Kubernetes scheduler uses this request value to decide on which node the pod can fit. So this number ensures the pod has the resources it needs to run.
- **Limits**: This value specifies the maximum amount of CPU or memory that a pod can use. If a pod exceeds this limit, Kubernetes will throttle the pod or kill it. This is how k8s ensures that a single pod does not consume all the resources in a node.

Imagine our deployment has the following setup:

```yaml
# deployment.yaml
resources:
  limits:
    memory: 2000Mi
    cpu: 1500m
  requests:
    memory: 1350Mi

>     cpu: 400m

Reviewer: I think this number may be wrong based on the numbers you use below (see my other comment)
```suggestion
    cpu: 500m
```

    
```

And our HPA is configured in the following manner:

```yaml
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: autoscaler-name
spec:
  scaleTargetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: autoscaler-name
  minReplicas: 1
  maxReplicas: 3
  metrics:
  - type: Resource
    resource:
      name: cpu
      target:
        type: Utilization
        averageUtilization: 90
  - type: Resource
    resource:
      name: memory
      target:
        type: Utilization
        averageUtilization: 90
```

> So what does this mean? Well if you are a proper engineer what you would do is check the official docs and try to carefully understand this. But if you are like me... you probably would make some assumptions and hope for the best (for finally ending up reading the docs 😅). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what does this mean? Well if you are a proper engineer what you would do is check the official docs and try to carefully understand this. But if you are like me... you probably would make some assumptions and hope for the best (only to end up having to read the docs 😅). 
```

> My first guess was that this would configure HPA to to scale up the number of pods when memory or CPU usage exceeded 90%. However, I overlooked a crucial detail: the calculation also needs to include the current number of replicas. Here’s how HPA actually works:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My first guess was that this would configure HPA to scale up the number of pods when memory or CPU usage exceeded 90%. However, I overlooked a crucial detail: the calculation also needs to include the current number of replicas. Here’s how HPA actually works:
```

```

> desiredReplicas = ceil[currentReplicas * ( currentMetricValue / desiredMetricValue )]

Reviewer: I'd point to the official section in the docs where the formula is: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/#algorithm-details

```

Where:
- `currentReplicas` is the number of replicas the deployment is currently running.
- `currentMetricValue` is the current value of the metric we are monitoring (e.g. CPU usage).

> - `desiredMetricValue` is the target value for the metric we are monitoring (e.g. 90% requested CPU usage).

Reviewer: I think it's important to clarify how this is computed. Is it
`desiredMetricValue = target.averageUtilization * requests (0.9*1350)`
or
`desiredMetricValue = target.averageUtilization * limits (0.9*2000)`

ChatGPT told me it was using limits, but this [post](https://pauldally.medium.com/horizontalpodautoscaler-uses-request-not-limit-to-determine-when-to-scale-97643d808997) says it's using requests.

Author: I will add that, it uses requests

So let's see what I observed in Grafana that day.

<div class="post-center-image">
    {% picture pimage /assets/images/fullsize/posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide/memory_cpu.png --alt Grafana plot showing memory and CPU usages %}
</div>

{:refdef: class="image-caption"}
*Figure 1. Grafana plot showing memory and CPU usages*
{: refdef}

> What we observed was that at 13:10, we had three pods running with memory usage around `1100 MB` and CPU usage less than `100m`. Both metrics appeared to be below the target values of 90% of 1350 MB for memory and 90% of 500m for CPU. So, why were there three pods running?

Reviewer: Above you used `I observed`, here you're back to pretending this was a team effort and you used `we`. Pick one and be consistent across the text.
```suggestion
What I observed was that at 13:10, we had three pods running with memory usage around `1100 MB` and CPU usage less than `100m`. Both metrics appeared to be below the target values: 1215 MB (=0.9*1350 MB) for memory and 450m (=0.9*500m) for CPU. So, why were there three pods running?
```

Reviewer: Notice that you wrote 500m for memory, but the manifest says 400m

## Debugging HPA

> Let's start by inspecting what has happened to our application step by step using our visualization tool using previous metrics. First, let's check the memory usage:

Reviewer: I'd present the visualization tool here saying something like:
```suggestion
Let's start by inspecting what has happened to our application step by step. For that purpose, I've built a visualization tool that allows you to enter the specific details of your current/target metrics, as well as the current number of replicas. Based on those inputs, it computes and displays the desired number replicas using the scaling formula above.

 First, let's check the memory usage:
```

</div>

{:refdef: class="image-caption"}
*Figure 2. HPA memory expected replica*
{: refdef}

The memory usage seems to be below the 90% so the number of replicas would be set to 1. Let's check the CPU usage now:

<div class="post-center-image">
    {% picture pimage /assets/images/fullsize/posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide/cpu_init.png --alt HPA CPU expected replicas %}
</div>

{:refdef: class="image-caption"}
*Figure 3. HPA CPU expected replica*
{: refdef}

At startup, the CPU usage exceeded the target value of `450m`. This means that the 'currentMetricValue / desiredMetricValue' ratio was greater than one, indicating that the autoscaler needed to scale up the replicas. But by how much? Let’s adjust the x-axis of the plot to display the number of replicas:

<div class="post-center-image">
    {% picture pimage /assets/images/fullsize/posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide/cpu_stairs.png --alt HPA CPU expected replicas showing stairs pattern %}
</div>

{:refdef: class="image-caption"}
*Figure 4. HPA CPU current replicas vs expected replicas*
{: refdef}

> There you go! We can clearly see a pattern resembling infinite stairs, similar to $f(x) = x + 1$. This occurs because the 'currentMetricValue / desiredMetricValue' ratio is greater than 1, prompting the autoscaler to continuously increase the number of replicas until it reaches the maximum allowed. In this instance, maxReplicas was set to 3. Thus, we have identified the root of the problem!

Reviewer: I find this section a bit confusing. You seem to indicate that since the ratio between current and target is 600/450=1.33, thendesiredReplicas=currentReplicas + 1, so it enters an infinite loop that is only broken by the maxReplicas=3.

However, that is only true if the CPU utilisation (600) maintains as you add more replicas). What I would expect is that by adding more replicas, you spread the load, so each individual replica usage goes down. Like with 1 replica you have 600m usage. Then with 2 maybe you have 300m each (probably more since there's some fixed usage per replica).

But I'll go back to this later on because for me, this was the most important takeaway from this post.

Reviewer: Also, there's a term for this: https://mathworld.wolfram.com/StaircaseFunction.html

```suggestion
There you go! We can clearly see the staircase pattern, similar to $f(x) = x + 1$. This occurs because the 'currentMetricValue / desiredMetricValue' ratio is greater than 1, prompting the autoscaler to continuously increase the number of replicas until it reaches the maximum allowed. In this instance, maxReplicas was set to 3. Thus, we have identified the root of the problem!
```

Author: Yeah, in this case the CPU load mantains even adding more replicas because the load does not seem to be related with traffic but with some high intensive task on app startup. It is worth it to add content to clarify this, thanks!

## Why is HPA not scaling down?

> Although CPU usage spiked at startup, it quickly returned to low levels. So why isn't the HPA scaling down the number of replicas? It appears that the CPU requirement is well below the target value of `450m`, as illustrated in Figure 1. However, the bottleneck now is memory usage.

Reviewer: I think you should quote this from the official docs here, because that's the key

> If multiple metrics are specified in a HorizontalPodAutoscaler, this calculation is done for each metric, and then the largest of the desired replica counts is chosen.

As shown by Grafana, memory usage remains constant. Figure 2 indicated that the expected number of replicas should be 1. However, since the HPA previously scaled up our replicas to 3, visualizing the same plot with the number of replicas on the x-axis reveals the following:

<div class="post-center-image">
    {% picture pimage /assets/images/fullsize/posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide/memory_stairs.png --alt HPA memory current replicas vs expected replicas %}
</div>

{:refdef: class="image-caption"}
*Figure 5. HPA memory current replicas vs expected replicas*
{: refdef}

With the current memory usage, the HPA behaves like the function $f(x) = x$, preventing the number of replicas from scaling down. This is why we continuously see three pods running, even though the pods are not receiving much traffic.

## Conclusion

> In this post, we looked at how the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) in Kubernetes helps manage the number of pods based on CPU and memory use. This is very important for keeping applications running smoothly as demands change. However, we also learned that it's crucial to keep an eye on and adjust the HPA settings in real-world use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we looked at how the Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) in Kubernetes helps manage the number of pods based on CPU and memory usage. This is very important for keeping applications running smoothly as demands change over time. However, we also learned that it's crucial to keep an eye on the HPA settings and adjust according to your real-world scenario.
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe you'll disagree here, we can discuss it if that's the case. But for me, the key takeaway is that you should scale based on metrics dominated by variable load, not fixed load. And I would emphasize this in the conclusions, maybe showing the figure I include below to illustrate it.

I think the underlying reason we run into this problem is memory usage was mostly fixed in our pods (happy to be corrected if I'm wrong). I make a distinction between:
 * Fixed memory (**F**): % of memory that is consumed by a pod by their mere existence
 * Variable memory (**V**): % of memory consumed based on load.  

Let's call **L** the overall memory consumption required by the incoming load at a given point in time. That load is spread across the **N** pods available, so for each pod `V=L/N`

The memory usage in a pod will therefore be
`M = F + L / N`

What's the problem then? Using the scaling function:
`desiredReplicas=ceil[currentReplicas * ( currentMetricValue / desiredMetricValue )]`

Let's assume desiredMetricValue=90% and let's consider two scenarios for F=10% and F=80%. Let's display the resulting formula (play with graph [here](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/vpbioaratm))
`desiredReplicas=ceil[currentReplicas * ( F / 0.9 )]`

![image](https://github.com/mmeendez8/mmeendez8.github.io/assets/51260739/e72fb894-d982-4090-aff7-aaadd1c9cdf9)

What happens? When F is dominating, desiredReplicas is almost equal to currentReplicas, so it's not able to scale down. However, when V is dominating, that's when it is able to do so!

If there's a spike in traffic causing your memory to overload, that will trigger a new pod. But if that new pod's RAM is mostly bloated with stuff that is not related to traffic (deps or whatever), only a small % of its RAM will be used to alleviate the traffic load. 

When the traffic goes back to normal, the RAM in the pods will only go down slightly because it's mostly occupied with the fixed stuff. So the autoscaler will not be able to go back to 1 pod. Which is pointless, because you're monitoring memory unrelated to the traffic!

> "If multiple metrics are specified in a HorizontalPodAutoscaler, this calculation is done for each metric, and then the largest of the desired replica counts is chosen."

This indicates that the issue now lies with memory usage. Grafana shows us that memory usage has remained constant after the scaling. According to *Figure 2*, the expected number of replicas should be just 1. However, since the HPA previously increased our replicas to 3, when we view the same plot with the number of replicas on the x-axis, it reveals the following:

<div class="post-center-image">
    {% picture pimage /assets/images/fullsize/posts/2024-04-23-kubernetes-horizontal-pod-autoscaler-guide/memory_stairs.png --alt HPA memory current replicas vs expected replicas %}
</div>

{:refdef: class="image-caption"}
*Figure 5. HPA memory current replicas vs expected replicas*
{: refdef}

With the current memory usage, the HPA behaves like the function $f(x) = x$, preventing the number of replicas from scaling down. This is why we continuously see three pods running, even though the pods are not receiving much traffic.

## What can we do?

> We have a couple of options to address this problem. For instance, we could change the memory and CPU targets in the HPA settings. Increasing the CPU requirements could help us to avoid the initial spike in replicas and prevent the staircase pattern. On the other hand if we increase the memory requirements we could avoid the bottleneck and scale down the number of replicas. However, this isn't a permanent solution because if our application's memory use fluctuates, we could encounter the same issue again. Instead, we should tackle the root cause and for this we need to differentiate between the fixed and variable usage of our metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have a couple of options to address this problem. For instance, we could change the memory and CPU targets in the HPA settings. Increasing the CPU requirements could help us avoid the initial spike in replicas and prevent the staircase pattern. On the other hand, if we increase the memory requirements, we could avoid the bottleneck and scale down the number of replicas. However, this isn't a permanent solution because if our application's memory use fluctuates, we could encounter the same issue again. Instead, we should tackle the root cause and for this we need to differentiate between the fixed and variable usage of our metrics.
```

The initial spike in CPU usage was due to the startup process, which is a fixed usage. As we could see before, adding more replicas doesn't alleviate the problem because the usage is related with the startup process and not the traffic. Conversely, when requests arrive at our service, the CPU usage can change, allowing the HPA to scale up or scale down the number of replicas. This represents variable usage.

> The memory usage always stays the same, no matter how many pods are running or how much traffic there is. This is called fixed usage. Because of this, the HPA behaves like a function where $f(x) = x$. Therefore, adjusting the number of pods based on memory usage doesn't work well because the memory doesn't vary with the traffic. The best strategy is to **remove the memory metric from the HPA** settings and scale only based on the CPU metric.

Reviewer 2: It's a bit weird to kind of define the term fixed usage here because you used in in the previous paragraph already
